Translator: Kerlene Telesford
Reviewer: Helene Batt
(Anastasia Garcia)
Good afternoon everyone.
(Man) Anastasia, it's a pleasure
to have you here at this first
TEDxBogota event for women.
We're excited to have you here,
a woman full of courage,
leadership, and desire for change,
who was able to travel to India
and learn about solar engineering --
something few people in the auditorium
may know or understand --
and you did that in another language,
emerged in another culture,
entirely different
from your own, the Wayuu.
It required a lot from you,
in your personal development
and your community's development.
Why did you accept this challenge,
this urge to travel so far
to learn something new?
(AG) I wanted to go
to a country I haven't been to before.
Planning it was a motivation for me,
envisioning something different
from what I have in my community
for the well-being of my Wayuu village.
I wanted to obtain knowledge
in solar engineering
for mothers and grandmothers
living in rural areas in the various
regions of this country,
in order to bring change
to our communities,
that can lead
to a better life for everyone.
(Man) You traveled 16,000 km
to a completely different culture.
I understand that you don't speak English.
(AG) No.
It was the first time
that I boarded a plane.
(Laughter)
(Man) How were you able to understand
what they were teaching you?
And how did others understand
what you were saying?
(AG) By using signs.
By listening and repeating many times --
a hundred times, like children do.
We would write everything down
into a notebook.
We would draw the tools they showed us.
The drawings weren't great --
I'm not a good artist --
so I gave them numbers
in order to remember them.
I couldn't use English,
so I learned numbers and colors.
I learned colors in order
to associate them with numbers.
That's how we learned.
Repeating them a thousand times a day,
morning til evening,
all day, from Monday to Friday.
(Man) That method was based
on an Indian education model,
to include illiterate
and semi-illiterate women,
mothers and grandmothers.
And the technique works primarily
with numbers, colors and signs.
What happened
if someone didn't understand?
What was the process
to ensure ideas could flow,
and for you to be able
to learn solar engineering?
(AG) The same way
they were teaching us using signs,
we would sign among classmates,
and be able to understand
each other that way.
That's how it flowed.
(Man) It's a little like returning
to infancy: signs, colors, gestures.
(AG) Yes, gestures and movements.
(Man) This is clearly
a transforming experience --
an opportunity for many women worldwide
who are discriminated against
or undervalued by their communities.
It's a program offered
by the Barefoot College
to provide education, which can then
be shared among the communities.
This program is solely for women
from around the world.
Who were your friends?
Who did you meet there?
Who did you get along with
so far from home?
We were 40 women from
different countries around the world.
From here, Panamanians and Nicaraguans.
There were Africans,
and women from Myanmar.
I made friends with women from Zanzibar,
the coastal area of Africa.
We got along well, they were very funny;
they soon made me forget
that I was far from my family, my country.
They made me feel at home.
(Man) Surely, there were
some sad or lonely moments.
How did you cope with that?
How did you overcome depression?
(AG) After four or five months --
it was six in total --
I felt far away from my people,
my family, children, and grandchildren.
I wanted to be by their side.
So I got closer to the Hindu people,
who were very kind to us,
who accepted us,
and gave us that education.
They were very kind,
and very nice during the classes.
We learned from them how to be humble,
and organized.
They are organized.
In spite of the difficulties,
they are organized.
(Man) You traveled
to learn solar engineering.
What did you learn specifically?
What are the learnings you're going
to share with your community?
(AG) I now have knowledge
that I can spread in Columbia --
knowledge that can affect me personally.
If I'm needed somewhere
where there are other women,
who have been to some faraway continent,
I can collaborate with them
on the installation, repair
and construction of the equipment
where solar energy will be captured,
because they taught us how to do it,
as well as lamps that generate light,
from energy via the panels.
(Man) Guajira is a forgotten,
abandoned region of the country,
where public services don't exist,
and there is need for electricity.
Tell us a little bit about life
in your community without electricity.
(AG) You have to get up very early,
and at 6 pm, you're already looking
to hang up your hammock.
That's the Wayuu within the communities.
Your chores end at 6 pm.
But having light within the community,
inside your ranch,
you actually have more time
during the night to do your activities.
As artisans, knitting your backpacks,
making your hammocks.
Children who are in school,
can do their homework and study.
(Man) Charging your cell phone,
for example.
(AG) Charging your cell phone,
and watching TV on a small television
because the big one doesn't work.
(Man) What will change
in your community's way of life?
(AG) It will teach them
to be more responsible
with the things that energy
will bring to their communities.
Because they are commitments.
They will be the ones
to take care of that.
I will supervise them
and do the maintenance.
But things will change for them;
if they have trade,
they will have greater earnings
and they will live better,
they will have a life change,
for the better.
(Man) When you returned home
after 6 months, how were you welcomed?
(AG) It was crazy.
(Laughter)
They had a big, crazy party for me.
(Man) And what did they ask you?
(AG) What did you learn,
What did you bring me?
(Laughter)
My friends from Zanzibar,
funny Moana and Zubira --
I will never forget their names --
The Nicaraguans were very humble with me,
they were always around me.
My teachers were Hindu
and there was a teacher
who was married to a Hindu
but she was Muslim,
she was very dear to me.
She was always attentive, asking
"What are you doing, Anastasia?
What do you want? And if I was in pain,
they would come every day to check on me.
If I was sick, "Pain?"
"No teacher, no pain."
(Laughing)
One day she came and said,
but quite happily, "Dollar?"
I didn't know what a dollar was;
they pronounce it "doller" there
and that day I had knee pain, so I said,
"Teacher, dolor, dolor [pain, pain]."
"No, no, dollar, dollar."
They had given us a few dollars
to keep, just in case.
When I showed her my knee,
she said, "No, no, dollar, dollar."
And she takes out some cash and shows me.
"Oh, teacher, I don't understand you."
(Laughter)
It's very different.
When we arrived we didn't
understand each another.
For example, they would use
a broom for sweeping,
and the person holding the broom
said to me, "Room."
I thought "room" meant "car,"
and the "room" is where you go to sleep.
"Room, room," he said,
so I responded, "Teacher, no room."
(Laughter)
(Applause)
(Man) What lesson do you want
women to share
with other indigenous and non-indigenous
communities in Columbia?
What lesson do you want
to tell them about?
Like, "This is what I learned,
this is what I want to share."
(Man) To all the indigenous
women of Columbia,
let's plan out our ideas,
implement them,
and put them into practice.
Before, I have never had
the opportunity to go somewhere,
not even to another county.
And I still took the risk to go to India
and learn something new.
I thought, "How will I be able
to learn solar engineering
if I don't know anything about it?"
I didn't know anything, but I learned.
Like a child starting to learn the ABC,
By saying it out load,
one, two, three, a thousand times.
Doing small numbers,
and that's how we learned.
(Man) The Wayuu are the largest
indigenous people group,
and the Wayuu language
is something we shouldn't lose.
I, we, would love for you to give us
some words of encouragement
inviting us to move forward,
inviting all these women to start now.
Please give us a few words
in the Wayuu language
and explain what it means.
(AG speaking in Wayuu)
"Thank you to everyone here
for listening."
Once again, I'd like to say
that we're making our project a reality
for the benefit of all humanity.
(Applause)
(Man) Anastasia,
thank you very much for joining us.
Thank you for sharing your knowledge.
I fearlessly declare that your words
have filled this auditorium with light.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Anastasia García de Sol.
(Applause)